3
387Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and Their Services  Chapter 3
Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 3.1 | How do we know which changes to marine ecosystems are specifically caused by climate change?
To attribute changes in marine ecosystems to human-induced climate change, scientists use paleorecords (reconstructing the links between 
climate, evolutionary and ecological changes in the geological past), contemporary observations (assessing current climate and ecological 
responses in the field and through experiments) and models. We refer to these as multiple lines of evidence, meaning that the evidence comes 
from diverse approaches, as described below.
Emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide from human activity cause ocean warming, acidification, oxygen 
loss, and other physical and chemical changes that are affecting marine ecosystems around the world. At the same 
time, natural climate variability and direct human impacts, such as overfishing and pollution, also affect marine 
ecosystems locally, regionally and globally. These climate and non-climate impact drivers counteract each other, add 
up or multiply to produce smaller or larger changes than expected from individual drivers. Attribution of changes in 
marine ecosystems requires evaluating the often-interacting roles of natural climate variability, non-climate drivers, 
and human-induced climate change. To do this work, scientists use
• paleorecords: reconstructing the links between climate and evolutionary and ecological changes of the past;
• contemporary observations: assessing current climate and ecological responses;
• manipulation experiments: measuring responses of organisms and ecosystems to different climate conditions; and
• models: testing whether we understand how organisms and ecosystems are impacted by different stressors, and 
quantifying the relative importance of different stressors.
Paleorecords can be used to trace the correlation between past changes in climate and marine life. Paleoclimate is 
reconstructed from the chemical composition of shells and teeth or from sediments and ice cores. Changes to sea 
life signalled by changing biodiversity, extinction or distributional shifts are reconstructed from fossils. Using large 
datasets, we can infer the effects of climate change on sea life over relatively long time scales⎯ usually hundreds to 
millions of years. The advantage of paleorecords is that they provide insights into how climate change affects life 
from organisms to ecosystems, without the complicating influence of direct human impacts.