3
469Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and Their Services  Chapter 3
Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 3.4 | Which industries and jobs are most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change in the oceans?
The global ocean underpins human well-being through the provision of resources that directly and indirectly feed and employ many millions 
of people. In many regions, climate change is degrading ocean health and altering stocks of marine resources. Together with over-harvesting, 
climate change is threatening the future of the sustenance provided to Indigenous Peoples, the livelihoods of artisanal fisheries, and 
marine-based industries including tourism, shipping and transportation.
The ocean is the lifeblood of the planet. In addition to regulating planetary cycles of carbon, water and heat, 
the ocean and its vast resources support human livelihoods, cultural practices, jobs and industries. The impacts 
of climate change on the ocean can influence human activities and employment by altering resource availability, 
spreading pathogens, flooding shorelines and degrading ocean ecosystems. Fishing and mariculture are highly 
exposed to change. The global ocean and inland waters together provide more than 3.3 billion people at least 
20% of the protein they eat and provide livelihoods for 60 million people. Changes in the nutritional quality or 
abundance of food from the oceans could influence billions of people.
Substantial economic losses for fisheries resulting from recent climate-driven harmful algal blooms and marine 
pathogen outbreaks have been recorded in Asia, North America and South America. A 2016 event in Chile caused 
an estimated loss of 800 million USD in the farmed-salmon industry and led to regional government protests. The 
recent closure of the Dungeness crab and razor clam fishery in the USA due to a climate-driven algal bloom harmed 
84% of surveyed residents from 16 California coastal communities. Fishers and service industries that support 
commercial and recreational fishing experienced the most substantial economic losses, and fishers were the least 
able to recover their losses. This same event also disrupted subsistence and recreational fishing for razor clams, 
important activities for Indigenous Peoples and local communities in the Pacific Northwest of the USA.